# Prose pipeline for food waste interventions work

## Data sources

We used 2012 data wherever possible with the following minor exceptions. For QFAHPD, the data are from 2004-2010 but these are only used for relative prices of foods, not absolute, so the difference should be negligible. For LAFA, if a food did not have specific loss and waste rates for 2012, we used the closest available year; in any case, the loss and waste rates change minimally from year to year. Some of our cost estimates were from years other than 2012; we converted all of the estimates to 2012 dollars by using the ratio of consumer price index for the relevant category of goods between 2012 and the year of the estimate.

### raw data (if needed, describe how these were extracted)

- Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output tables for 2012 (BEA)
- Quarterly Food-at-Home Price Database (QFAHPD)
- Loss-Adjusted Food Availability data series for 2012 (LAFA)
- Economic Census for 2012
- Statistics of U.S. Businesses for 2012 (SUSB)
- population data for 2012 from U.S. Census

### external models

- USEEIO model for 2012, including satellite tables
- FDA reformulation cost model (spoilage prevention packaging)
- FDA labeling cost model (standardized date labeling)

## Pre-processing

1. Create crosswalks to harmonize different input data. Everything ultimately needs to be converted to BEA codes to feed into the input-output model.
  + NAICS codes to BEA codes (both NAICS 2007 and NAICS 2012)
  + BEA codes to LAFA categories to QFAHPD categories
2. Use the rates of food loss and waste by food item from the LAFA database to calculate the weighted average of food waste rates for each BEA code. This requires converting LAFA's food waste rates by weight to rates by value using the QFAHPD data.
  + Beverages are not included in LAFA, so we use a value from a publication to assign to the three BEA codes representing non-alcoholic beverages (coffee/tea, drink concentrates, and soft drinks)
3. Build and run USEEIO2012 model to calculate the summed direct and indirect impacts for satisfying $1 demand in all categories.
4. Gather together all parameters. List data sources.
  + We obtained minimum and maximum parameters for the PERT distributions using a formula, or used 0.8x and 1.2x of the mode.
  
## Estimates for each intervention

For each parameter, draw 10000 values from the respective PERT distribution. All are independent of one another.

### SDL

For SDL, we considered all consumer demand for food and drink in 2012 eligible for the intervention. We assumed a fixed percentage of food waste in the home was due to confusion over expiration dates. We multiplied the consumer food waste rate for each BEA code by this percentage to get the baseline rate of food waste due to expiration date confusion. We assumed a fixed response rate by consumers, and adjusted the final demand based on this response rate to get the demand averted by implementing the intervention. These assumptions are derived from the ReFED report.

We did not assume any offsetting environmental impacts; our assumption of 100% coordination in the labeling cost model means that all changes to equipment and materials required to change date labels are done concurrently with other needed changes. There are no additional environmental impacts of changing date labeling practice beyond what is already generated by other changes to packaging.

### SPP

**first describe how we got costs by product, backed out of the cost model**

For SPP, we considered packaged fresh foods at retail establishments and households to be eligible for the intervention, including fruit, vegetables, red meat, poultry, and seafood. We used the average baseline retail and consumer waste rates for the BEA codes representing those five foods (weighted averages of the waste rates of the LAFA categories within each BEA code). We assumed a different effectiveness (proportional reduction in waste rate) of the intervention in retail establishments and in households. Finally, we assumed that only a proportion of the fresh foods in each category are sold packaged and therefore are eligible for the intervention. We assumed the same proportion for fruits as for vegetables, and the same proportion for red meat, poultry, and seafood.

We assigned environmental impacts generated by implementing the intervention to the "plastic film" industry *(look up real name)*. We used the USEEIO model to estimate the environmental impact generated by producing $1 worth of final demand from that industry, then multiplied those impacts by the annual material costs for each food type.

### CEC

For CEC, we assumed that the consumer education campaign is run annually in all metropolitan counties of the United States (in 2012, 1251 counties comprising ~85.6% of the population of the 50 states and Washington, D.C.) We assumed a single effectiveness value (proportional waste reduction) for all household food consumption across all food types, including non-alcoholic beverages.

We assigned environmental impacts generated by the intervention to several industries: "specialized design services" for content development, "advertising and PR services" for media consulting, and a combination of magazine, radio/television, and internet publishing for the media campaign itself. We used a variety of sources to derive our assumptions for the proportion of each of the three media. The costs used to estimate the impacts from the USEEIO model include the annual costs of content development and media consulting nationwide, plus the cost of running a campaign in a single county multiplied by the number of counties multiplied by the number of monthlong campaigns run per year.

### WTA

** edit this later if we add back in the restaurant categories (limited-service and full-service restaurants)**

For WTA, we assumed that all establishments in the BEA codes within the broader categories of institutions (K-12 schools, higher education, hospitals and care facilities, and community services) and the tourism and hospitality sector (transportation, hotels, casinos, resorts, parks, and stadiums) contract foodservice operations to provide food. We found the amount of food each of the BEA codes within those sectors purchases from the BEA use table, one of the input-output tables released by BEA in 2012. For this intervention, we assumed that WTA systems do not track beverage losses; therefore, we excluded all beverage purchases from the analysis. We used the crosswalk table we created to harmonize the BEA, QFAHPD, and LAFA datasets to retotal the rows and columns of the relevant submatrix of the I-O table, going from BEA codes to LAFA categories. This enabled us to estimate the baseline rate of food loss and waste by the establishments that contract foodservice operators, and the hypothetical reduction in food purchases by those establishments that would result if they installed a WTA system. 

We assumed a single effectiveness value (proportional waste reduction) resulting from implementing the WTA intervention. WTA systems typically only target kitchen waste, but the food waste rates in LAFA include both kitchen and plate waste. Therefore, we needed to determine the proportion of kitchen waste within the baseline food waste rate. We derived this assumption from several published sources; estimates varied widely.

We used the 2012 Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB) dataset to find the number of establishments in 2012 for all NAICS codes within the BEA codes we selected. Some of the BEA industries contain NAICS codes that are not associated with establishments that contract foodservice operations. We used the finer NAICS classification of numbers of establishments to exclude establishments belonging to those NAICS codes, then summed up the number of establishments by BEA industry. We imputed two missing values of number of establishments in the SUSB dataset (water transportation and air transportation) by using linear interpolation. 

We assigned environmental impacts generated by implementing the intervention to three industries: computer manufacturing, computer monitor and peripheral manufacturing, and other machinery manufacturing. The latter category includes the NAICS code for manufacturing of industrial and retail scales. We accounted for uncertainty in the relative proportions of equipment costs among the three industries.


